Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Lobs. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Fernando Freya. She is
distinguished Professor of Psychology at the University of California
Davis. Her area of research is psycholinguistics. She uses
basic insights from formal linguistic, special theories in sentence
phonology and syntax to develop models of processing. And
today we're talking about modifiers, speech disfluencies, misinterpretations and
how people deal with them, the study of reading
and information processing through wide tracking and some other
related topics. So, Doctor Ferreira, welcome to the show.
It's a big pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much. It's really great to be
here. Thanks for the invitation.
Great. So perhaps to introduce people to the topics
we're going to explore here and also to you
a little bit more. Could you please start by
telling us about the kind of work you specifically
do the questions from linguistics you are most interested
in and how you got into it?
Ok. Um I guess I'll start at the highest
sort of at a high level of, of um
generalization. I'm interested in language. I've always been interested
in how language works. And I began to be
interested in the question of how humans process language.
When I was an undergraduate, um I became fascinated
by questions of uh you know, human nature and
what made humans unique. What are the, what are
the, what is it, the balance between nature and
nurture and those sorts of questions? And in the
course of pursuing those, those topics, I ended up
taking classes in philosophy of mind and epistemology as
well as classes in psychology of course. And I
never actually took a class in linguistics when I
was an undergraduate because we didn't really have a
linguistics program. But through some of these other courses,
I began to realize that there was this area
of research this that looked at language processing from
a science from or looked at language from a
kind of a computational and biological point of view.
And then with psycholinguistics, I discovered an area where
people were looking at questions from a processing computational
psychological view and trying to understand how the language
system worked together with other cognitive systems, like memory
and uh decision making and attention and how all
those cognitive systems that are not specifically dedicated to
language combined with language systems to enable us to
speak and to understand each other. So uh in
my own research, I focused on questions like how
we use the grammar of our language to in
real time to process sentences. So, uh for example,
we know that in English, uh we tend to
place our modifiers of nouns um before the noun.
Whereas in Portuguese, they, they come after the noun.
And so this is um the kind of information
that a listener can use online to anticipate what
sort of word type is likely to be coming
up next. And in production, it's information that would
be we would be using to constrain the form
of our, of our sentences. So um I guess
then my general approach to studying language has been
to use primarily behavioral methods and I trying to
understand how people generate linguistic representations in real time
and how the language system works cooperatively with other
cognitive systems to allow these representations to get generated,
whether it's in comprehension or in production.
Mhm. So let's get into some more specific questions.
Uh I would also want to ask you uh
some of the methods you use in your research,
but perhaps it's easier to get into some of
the topics and then we'll, we can go through
some of the methods as we talk about them.
So uh you are interested, for example, in uncovering
the mechanisms that enable humans to understand and generate
language in real time and in cooper operation with
other cognitive systems. So what are these uh mechanisms
and how do you approach these kinds of questions?
Um Well, so one kind of mechanism that people
use when they are um trying to understand language
is that they uh there's a, so there's a
term we use in psycholinguistics and computational linguistics. We
refer to the parser and the parser is the
component of the language system that takes this continuous
stream of input, whether it's auditory or signed or
visual um in the visual modality and breaks it
up into pieces like words and grammatical phrases and
uses those phrases to obtain uh an understanding of
what a sentence might mean. And so uh the
parser in order to do this is going to
consult grammatical information. So information about the rules of
the language that allow words to be put together
and possibly um in some languages, at least rules
about things like um agreement like grammatical agreement. So
in English, we don't have a lot of it,
but like in Portuguese, for example, we have um
gender agreement and that kind of information can help
the processor figure out how to chunk this continuous
stream of sound or of squiggles on a computer
screen into discrete units like words and phrases and
so on. And so in the research, I've looked
at the question of how this grammatical knowledge is
consulted in real time and what the language processing
system does when it's faced with more than one
possible interpretation that it could draw of a constituent.
Um BECAUSE there's a lot of ambiguity in language,
there's a lot of situations or, or the parser
will often find itself confronted with input that can
receive more than one grammatical analysis. Um Things like
um I si saw the, I saw the boy,
I saw the boy with the binoculars, you know,
in that sentence. Um There are two possible grammatical
analysis. You used binoculars to see the boy or
you saw a boy who had, who had binoculars
on him, on his person in some way. And
so the question is, you know, which of how
does the processing system decide which interpretation to get?
And a lot of my work has been centered
around questions like that where we focus on information
sources like, well, maybe the system tries to compute
the simplest analysis. And if that simple analysis is
not sufficient or gets blocked in some way, then
the system has to construct an alternate, then it
goes to it to the more difficult analysis. But
the default is to construct a simple analysis. Um
OR maybe the system looks at the context and
says, well, uh in a situation like this, it's
very likely that somebody would be using binoculars as
an instrument. And therefore I'm going to compute that
analysis. Um MAYBE pros plays a role. So the
way that the sentence is pronounced. So if I
say um I saw the boy with binoculars, um
I might be sort of indicating that actually, as
I say that I don't know which one would
be more likely. But there are claims in the
literature that one way of saying it versus another
way will push you in one towards one analysis
or another. So in my research, we, we have
tried to understand these questions using methods like um
anything from acceptability judgments which are very cheap and
easy to get all the way to um things
like eye tracking. And we have done some F
MRI and er P research as well. Although cognitive
neuroscience is not my core area of research,
uh we will come back to eye tracking and
also to how people deal with, as you said,
their, the ambiguities of language. But now, uh I
have another uh uh aspect of your work that
I would like to explore here. So you've also
done some work on how the position of modifiers
in English specifically influences how words are encoded and,
and later on retrieved from memory. So, uh how
does that occur? And is there a difference between
how people in code and process pre modifiers versus
post modifiers? And, and by the way, what are
modifiers to begin with?
Ok. So um I'm actually looking at a presentation
that I gave on this topic just to help
me remember some details. And then a very important
um to begin with is that the work on
pre nominal versus post nominal modifiers that I've done
is entirely led by my former graduate student Hussein
Karimi and Hussein is now at Mississippi State University.
Um When he worked with me, he was really
interested in this question of how modifiers influence our
interpretations of language. And so he partly came to
Davis to work with me because he wanted to
explore this topic with me. But I need to
give credit to Hussein that this research was um
designed by him, led by him. Um He's the
one who kind of formulated the specific research questions
that we would ask, but that we asked, but
he started from work that I had done before.
I got to know him probably when he was
still a little boy or maybe not even born
yet work that I had done with my partner
John Henderson, where we looked at the um interpretation
of garden path sentences. So these garden path sentences
are sentences that have an, an a syntactic ambiguity
in them and they're called garden path because you
tend to go one way in your interpretation of
the ambiguity and the subsequent material in the sentence
contradicts that analysis and forces you to have to
go the other way with the sentence. And the
classic example is the horse raced past the barn
fell which everybody hates and it doesn't really make
a lot of sense, but it does have a
legitimate analysis. The horse that was raced past the
barn fell, that's what the sentence actually means. And
in English, we can delete some of those optional
function words. So when people get the horse race
past the barn, they think they're done they think
they have a complete active clause and then they
get this verb fell and it's like, what am
I supposed to do with this? I can't figure
out where this is supposed to go. And so
they have, and so they struggle and they finally
reanalyze the sentence. Um IN the work that I
did with John Henderson, we looked at sentences like
uh while Mary bathed the baby played and in
a sentence like that uh if you get while
Mary bathed the baby, you or would be tempted
to treat that as a chunk that Mary's bathing
the baby. So you get while Mary bathes the
baby and then you get a word like played
and you're you've been led down the garden path,
it turns out the baby is playing and Mary's
bathing herself. And so in that work, John, in
the work that I did with John, we showed
that if you take that phrase while Mary ba
the baby plate, if you take the baby and
you lengthen it with modifiers, so you have the
baby that was cute and cuddly. So the full
sentences while Mary bathes the baby, that was cute
and cuddly played, you really make the garden path
more severe. The garden path becomes far more uh
hard, it becomes far harder to recover from. And
yet we show that if you have a sentence
like while Mary bathed the cute and cuddly baby
played, that's not harder than just the baby. So
the core idea here is that we've got a
noun phrase the baby and it can be modified
with something like cute and cuddly like all babies
are cute and cuddly, right? So it can, and
in English, we can either say the cute and
cuddly baby or we can say the baby that's
cute and cuddly. And that's the pre nominal versus
post nominal distinction. We can either put the adjectives
before the noun which is kind of the default
or we can put them after the noun. And
so what this work that I did with John
Henderson showed a long time ago is that if
you put the modifiers after the noun, you make
the garden path more severe. So Hussein Karimi came
to me in the mid two thousands to work.
Uh uh ACTUALLY after 2010 to work with me
on this to pursue this issue further where he
wanted to look at the possibility that modified nouns
in general are richer and that we remember them
better. So if you have a sentence, like I
saw the cute and cuddly baby versus just I
saw the baby cute and cuddly adds information that
makes the concept of baby more memorable. And, and
so we started out with doing some experiments where
we showed exactly that, that any noun in a
sentence that's modified will tend to be remembered better
than a noun that isn't modified. So that just
kind of established this enhanced um memorability of any
noun in a sentence that has received a modifier.
Um Let me know if I'm going on too
much or is this? OK.
No, no, no, no, that's perfectly fine.
Yeah. OK. So, so having shown that a noun
in a sentence that has been modified is has
a richer representation in memory. Um Hussein then wanted
to know whether it matters if it's, I saw
the cute and cuddly baby or I saw the
baby that's cute and cuddly. In other words, is
we already know that modification makes the noun richer.
But is there a difference in how rich it
becomes with modification? Depending on whether the modifiers are
pre nominal, that is they occur before the noun
or post nominal, they occur after the noun. And
so we did a series of experiments where we
showed that if you give people sentence with something
like uh the dog chased the angry cat, people
are more likely to continue to, to write a
follow up sentence that is about the cat than
about the dog. And we show that that effect
is even greater if the modifier is after cat
rather than before the cat. And in um other
work, um Let me just consult this present this
uh summary that I have here just to make
sure I don't get anything wrong. Um Right. And
um the information and a noun phrase is read
faster when it's when it has post nominal modifiers
and what has pre nominal modifiers. So, in general,
what this seems to suggest is that when you
have a, when you have a phrase and you're
trying to interpret it as a listener or reader,
you get something like the, and then the best
thing is to get the noun next because the
noun is the the boss of the phrase. So
the cute and c if I'm saying in English,
the cute and cuddly, you know, your processing system
is in a state of limbo of like the
cute and cuddly. What um if you say the
baby that's OK. Now you, you, you have been
told what is the entity that's at issue here
and then you get the modifier and you can
kind of conveniently attach that modification to something that
you already have a token in your mental representation
for. So our um work suggests then that the
head of the phrase is the boss and is
the thing that you're processing is centered around. And
so this leads to some really interesting questions like
why does English work the way it does? And
why in general are there any languages where the
the head occurs after its constituent after its arguments
or after its modifiers? So English is a language
that is um generally heads occur first, but noun
phrases are the one place where we actually post
can postpone the head. And what we show is
that, that actually leads to processing costs. So, um
really it would be better if languages worked. So
that heads always occurred first and consist recently occurred
first. Um But of course, there probably are other
tradeoffs that are making head initial languages not necessarily
more efficient than head final languages. Um But at
any rate, that's kind of the, that's kind of
the story about head initial versus uh well about
pre nominal versus post nominal modification.
So another topic I would like to ask you
about is speech disfluency. So, first of all, what
are speech disfluencies? And uh if I got this
correctly, I got from your work and your of
the work of other people that there are four
different types of disfluency filled puzzles like mm and
uh and stuff like that. Unfilled puzzles, repetitions and
repair. So, could you tell us about that?
Um Sure. So no doubt in this um uh
video, you've already heard a lot of examples of
disfluencies. Um BECAUSE of all of us use disfluencies
and, and uh display disfluencies when we're speaking. Uh
The idea is that, um see, there we go,
there is a disfluency right there. Um Yeah, you
basically laid out the, the types of disfluencies that
are out there there. The first three, the filled
pauses, unfilled pauses and repeats are kind of um
tactics for buying time. And then the repairs are
the kind of disc fluency that we have to
invoke when we didn't quite plan as effectively as
we could have. And we've made a mistake and
we need to correct it. We could actually even
talk about another kind of disfluency, which we could
maybe refer to as an undetected error where we
say something incorrect. And our interlocutor might say, put
the milk in the, put the milk in the
stove, you mean the fridge, right? And you say,
oh yeah, yeah. You know, you know what I
mean kind of thing. Um So uh disfluencies are
really fascinating because they are a really great example
of the way that we have this, these linguistic
representations. We have these grammars that we can consult,
that enable us to produce and understand sentences. But
when we're applying them in real time, we we
often find ourselves not able to retrieve the information
that we need as quickly as we would like
to, to maintain full fluency. So there might be
a word that's uh that's rare or that's escaping
us or I can't quite remember your name. So
I put in an ah or I pause um
or I just say the the, you know, the
the as a way of getting extra time. So,
disfluencies um um that uh where disfluencies tend to
occur can give us some insights into what kinds
of constituents or other or words or phrases are
hard for the linguistic system to retrieve or from
the memory system to retrieve. And in work I
did recently with my graduate students. Um uh Nora
Beer and Nae Chanta Von. Um BOTH of whom
are now now have their phd S and have
moved on. We actually try to look at the
question of whether people as they become older, become
more disfluent. So o older adults are thought to
become more our impression is that they become more
disfluent as they age, they say um and uh
and they pause more than younger people do. Um
But the evidence on this point has been really
mixed in the literature. And as you can imagine,
it's pretty hard to study how disfluencies change with
age because what you really want to do is
follow somebody longitudinally. You want to start with someone
in their twenties, record how many disfluencies they produce,
then record them in their thirties and then they're
in their forties and then in their seventies and
eighties, of course, no one's gonna live long enough
to do that to do that study. So it's
really a tough question to address. So most of
the work that's being done is what we call
cross sectional, which means you compare some young people
count how many disciplines they produce and some old
people. But that introduces all kinds of confounds. It's
not the most powerful way to get at the
question. So in this study, what we did, um
and it was inspired actually by um uh uh
an incident where I was listening to a news
to the news and they were interviewing our former
governor of California. Jerry Brown, who was Governor of
California fairly recently. And he was also governor of
California in the 19 seventies. And I listened to
him in the current times. I was struck by
how disfluent he was, not that he was super
disfluent, but I remember in the seventies he was
just smooth, you know, you just seem to make
no mistakes at all. He's talked the way people
could, you know, would read a speech or something.
And I thought jeez, you know, this would be
a really cool way to look at this question
longitudinally is to go on youtube and find videos
of people being interviewed at multiple times in their
lives, you know, take somebody like uh Jerry Brown,
they're very well. There are recordings of him being
interviewed at different stages of his life. So what
we did was to collect youtube videos of people
like Oprah Winfrey, David Bowie, Jerry Brown, you know,
all kinds of people who by necessity are famous
because most people who will be interested multiple times
over their lives and you on you and who's
would then be up on youtube would tend to
have a little bit of, of fame associated with
them. And we counted the the disfluencies in their
speech at the different times of their lives. And
what we discovered is that actually people do not
become more disfluent as they age. Um Contrary to
what anyone would have expected. What we did observe
is that older adults have what's called enhanced lexical
diversity. Meaning that if you look at the set
of words that people produce as they get older,
they come from, they display richer vocabulary. So older
people have access to more words and we know
this from lots and lots of, of research on
aging. There's one thing that happens to you with
increasing age, that's good is that, you know, more
and more words. Um But as you know, more
and more words, they do get harder and harder
to retrieve because it's sort of like rummaging in
a drawer that's full of stuff and the more
stuff that's in there, the harder it can be
to find the exact thing that you want. And
so the slight tendency for more dis fluency that
we did observe in older adults could be pretty
much entirely explained in terms of their wish to
retrieve a word that was a little bit more
precise, a little bit less frequent that um was
there probably a little bit hard to retrieve and
they needed a little bit of extra time in
order to pull it out of their um mental
dictionary or lexicon? Um So sorry, that's like a
very long winded description. But it tells us that
we can look at questions like um how do
people age? What happens to the language system with
the age? What's the relationship between memory and language
uh by examining something as simple as just people's
speech and counting up how many uh and ums
and repairs they produce in that speech. So that's
all on the language production end. Um I haven't
talked about language comprehension and fluency. So I'll just
tell you really briefly that the question that we
can ask. And uh is it OK. Do you
want me to continue with it?
Yes. Yes. And then, uh we'll also have some
follow up questions to all of what you're saying
there. But yes, please go ahead.
OK. So the thing with disfluencies and comprehension is
that when I um um um when I'm doing
that you as a listener are kind of on
hold, you're waiting, your, so your parser, your language
processing system that's been engaged is now in a
state of being on hold waiting for the speaker
to kind of resume the, the processing. Um Similarly,
if I produce a mistake and then have to
engage in a repair, you, you as the comprehend,
have to invoke probably inhibition mechanisms that delete the
word that I said and replace it with the
word that I meant to say. So if I
say something like I did this research with Nora,
I mean, with Hussein, you initially built a representation
where you understood me to be saying that I
did this research with Nora. But if I then
say no, I mean, Hussein, you need to strike
that from the record kind of like a jury
that's told by a judge, forget what you were
just told, you need to remove that from your
mental representation and replace what I said with the
correct word that I intended. And what we showed
in some really, um I think fun research that
I did with a former postdoc named Matthew Lauder
who's now at the University of Richmond. What Matt
and I showed is that when people get something
like put the milk back in the stove, which
is going to be corrected because that's a very
common kind of speech error that people will make.
Um WHAT listeners do is they right away begin
to detect that you have made a mistake because
it's, it's not plausible to put milk in a
stove. And what we showed using something called a
visual world paradigm, which is about eye tracking, which
I guess is something we'll get to later is
that if you show people pictures of things in
a kitchen, um and I say, put the casserole
in the stove, your eyes go to a picture
of a casserole, your eyes go to the image
of the stove. But if I say put the
milk in the stove, your eyes will go to
the milk, but they don't even tend to go
to the stove. They go, you, you look directly
at the fridge as if your autocorrect brain mechanisms
as you're processing language are saying, forget stove, that's
not what the person meant. That's a mistake. So
we process disfluencies really efficiently because we're, we're able
to use what some people in cognitive science refer
to as our priors where a or you can
just think of it as world knowledge and plausibility
information which tells us that milk doesn't belong in
a stove, that stove and fridge or words that
people are likely to confuse with each other. And
what you're trying to do as a listener is
to uncover the communicative intention behind what the speaker
is saying. You're not only using the literal world
words in order to do that. Um So that's
another thing then we can learn from by studying
disfluencies this time in comprehension, we can get a
really good window into the way that our brains
autocorrect um and filling in mechanisms work. So it's
not just our phones and our devices that are
good at um correcting our mistakes, but our brains
are good at doing that too.
Ok. So several questions about all of that. So
the first one is uh is it that every
time people use a field pause, an unfilled pause,
a repetition or a repair, you classify it as
a this fluency? I mean, I'm asking you that
because since it's so common that we use these
kinds of uh this fluent or have this, this
sort of this fluent behaviors while talking, I was
wondering if it's always problematic. I mean, cognitively, for
example, since you also mentioned there, uh comparing younger
people to older people in terms of rates of
this fluency and all of that, I was wondering
if it would also be tied to perhaps some
sort of uh cognitive issues, cognitive decline or something
like that. So I I, is it always a
cognitively problematic if we use these sorts of these
fluence?
So I, that's a really interesting, that's a really
important question. So in production, what we have shown
in other work that I did, I did with
a former colleague named Joel ***, who's an expert
on ad DH D. We looked at in, at
adults who had been diagnosed with, it had received
an official diagnosis of A DH D when they
were young and we compared them to demographically demographic
control. So people who are same education level, roughly
the same age, who had the same um income
level and so on who had not ever received
an A DH D diagnosis. And interestingly what we
showed is that people with a DH D do
not produce more disfluencies than people who had never
been diagnosed with a DH D except for the
repair type. So what that seems to suggest is
that if you've had a DH, perhaps as you
might expect, your inhibition, inhibition mechanisms aren't working quite
as well or as efficiently as they might in
other people. And as a result, you'll say the
wrong word a little bit more frequently than someone
who's never had ad a DH D and have
to make a repair. So, what this kind of
suggests is that us and, ums and pauses are
actually a good way to plan. Ok. So I
was talking about the, that in cases of a
DH D, uh, we can see that disfluencies are
by comparing, uh, individuals who've had a DH D
to those who haven't, we can get a picture
that tells us that pauses are an effective way
to buy time. And that in some ways, it's
not a matter of never being disfluent. It's kind
of like picking your poison. Do you want to
be disfluent by carefully planning and pausing and saying
us? And um so that you don't make a
mistake or are you gonna wait more heavily, the
system operating so that you don't make any pauses?
But, and that increases the likelihood of errors. So
it's not really a matter of ever. I don't
think any mere mortal can ever be perfectly fluent.
And it just is a matter of whether you're
in a situation where you're going to wait precision
very carefully and therefore produce maybe more pauses or
whether you're going to wait fluency more heavily and
therefore increase the potential for making errors which will
necessitate a repair. Um That's on the production side,
on the comprehension side, it's super interesting to think
about disfluencies as cues. And in fact, if we
go back to the work of the pioneers in
this field like Herb Clark and Tom Wo this
is actually what they've argued that when people are
um interpreting language, they use disfluencies as information. Um
For example, if I say the um cat like
that's a little bit un unexpected because cats are
pretty easy word to retrieve. If I say the
um feline like that is the um is a
little bit more expected because feline is a slightly
rarer word. So if you hear me produce an
R and um perhaps you can get yourself prepped
for a slightly less expected word or concept. And
there's really cool research by people like Jennifer Arnold
demonstrating that this is true that you can use
disfluencies as cues that somebody is about to refer
to something that's not, yes yet, maybe introduced or
has not been talked about for a little while.
And in research I did with Carl Bailey, we
showed that disfluencies can tell you that you're about
to begin a new clause in a sentence because
we tend to produce um before the beginnings of
at the beginnings of clauses, nobody's just fluent at
the end of the sentence. So nobody says John
went to the store um like that doesn't make
any sense, but we would say um John went
to the store. So these disfluencies can be used
as information about what a speaker is likely to
say. So they help the listener get a head
start on what's about to happen. Plus there's one
more function of disfluencies, I should say because we
now have disfluencies in written language as well. So
if you uh especially in casual writing, like uh
social media or um in instant messaging or direct
messages to people will often in insert um or
an uh because we know that they actually convey
a little bit of meaning. If I say something
like I heard about your um story, you know,
that sort of is um I'm using um there
as kind of a word to suggest skepticism about
your um uh that story is, you know, about
the concept of, of the story here. So uh
disfluencies have a, have a number of potentially useful
functions.
Mhm And with all of those disfluencies that we
tend to have and sometimes misspoken words or using
even the incorrect words. And uh all of that,
how of how, how often do comprehend misinterpret language
actually? Does, does it occur often or not? And
with all of course, with all the ambiguity surrounding
language and all of that,
that's I'll give you two answers to that question.
One is we can't really know and the other
is that based on what we know, probably less
often than we might worry, we misinterpret each other.
So, on the one hand, it's very hard to
know how often we misinterpret each other because misinterpretations
are private, I can't tell by just sort of
looking at you, right. Now, to what extent you
are understanding each and every word that I've said
because I don't have access to your mental states.
And we know that uh well, you know, before
this interview started, we, we talked a little bit
about speaking Portuguese. And um you know, I can
understand Portuguese far, far more easily than I can
speak it because I can piece things together. I
can use context and comprehension and I can fake
it. I can pretend that I'm understanding and then
hope that something the person says uh subsequently clarifies
the word that I don't actually know. And I
don't want to admit that I don't know it.
So I'm pretending. Um So we really need to
do experiments in order to get at misinterpretations. And
what experiments like the ones we've done in my
lab with people like Kyle Christiansen, for example, have
shown is that indeed people can be quite bad
at understanding language. They misinterpret the syntactic structure. They
even get, get the words in the sentence wrong.
We've shown that people interpret a sentence like the
dog was bitten by the man to mean that
the dog bit the man because it's much more
likely that a dog would bite a human than
the other way around. Um And so there, and
we know from really interesting work going back to
the seventies that Lynn reader, for example, did on
the, what's the, the so called Moses illusion? Um
Where if I ask you how many of each
kind of animal did Moses take on the Ark?
A lot of people will just say, 02. Um
But what they really should say is uh you
mean Noah, not Moses because that um you know
the way the story goes, it was Noah and
not Moses. So the Moses illusion reveals that people
often will, we will not understand the language correctly.
And these autocorrect mechanisms are so robust that sometimes
they work in such a way that they're fixing
the input for us and we're not even aware
of it. Um And I might be trying to
tell you something unexpected, but your uh systems of
for processing noisy information are smoothing it out, but
it may be distorting the message that I'm trying
to convey. So that's one answer is that we
know from a lot of research that people misinterpret
each other fairly often in our experiments. But now
real life, how often do people actually in real
life misinterpret each other? Because the thing is in
our experiments, we've designed our stimuli to be confusing.
We've designed, we know the dog was bitten by
the man. I've used the passive structure there. I've
told you about something implausible because I want to
lure you into misunderstanding that sentence. And the same
goes for garden path sentences. So we can't, based
on our estimates on how often people misinterpret each
other in misinterpret language on the results of experiments
because those experiments are designed to elicit misinterpretations. But
what we can, but in when we've, what some
researchers have done, not me, um I think people
like um Doug Roland and uh Jan uh Jassy
have done this kind of work is to look
at cor big corpora of language, you know, just
big chunks, naturally spoken language and looked at how
truly ambiguous things are in real context. And what
they show is that when you take into account
all this additional sources of information that people can
rely on language isn't as ambiguous as we might
think. And so it's probably the case that we
misunderstand each other a lot less. Then our experiments
would suggest because we normally have a lot of
opportunities to clarify what we meant. And just generally,
the signal in real conversations is much richer than
it is in an experiment in experiments. People are
in a darkened room and they're, you know, looking
at single sentences on a computer screen in real
life, you can use my speech, but you can
also use my, you know, my gestures, you can
use um the what I've said in the previous
45 minutes, you know, all of these things to
help you and you might also know some things
about me. So you might know that certain errors
that I tend to make in speech. So it's
kind of a different situation in real language. So
what I would say is that language. Fortunately, the
language systems have evolved to be very, very efficient
and to enable us to communicate. Nevertheless, we can
say that we always understand each other correctly, right?
The world is full of misunderstandings.
Yeah, I I was actually going to say and
if anything that I'm about to say is incorrect,
please correct me. But I was going to say
that in real life. I mean, as you said,
there, we have many more cues to draw from
like for example, non verbal cues, body language gestures.
And so for example, if I hear someone using
an incorrect word, perhaps they're pointing at something and
I immediately understand what, what they meant by what
they were saying, right? And sometimes by intonation or
something like that or uh uh or perhaps sometimes
uh people misspeak, but they the the next sentence,
uh they, I mean, clarify what they mean or
perhaps with the next sentence, we have added context
to what they said previously. And then we understand
really what they were trying to say. And also
I guess that even the talker, the peop the
person who's speaking also react to how the other
person reacts to them talking. And perhaps there are
instances where we understand that perhaps we said something
that the other person might have misunderstood or we
might have misspoken in some way and we go
back and add more information or correct ourselves. Or
sometimes I guess what happens is that we just
misinterpret what people said, but it's just something that
doesn't matter that much. And so it makes no
difference at all for our interaction, for our life
and stuff like that.
Right. Right. Uh, I think I, that's all of
that is absolutely correct. And it makes a, helps
to make a point that I've often tried to
communicate in my work, which is that when we
look at misinterpretations and ambiguity and how ambiguities are
resolved, we're not doing it because we think this
is a general problem in language. Garden Path sentences,
for example, don't happen very often in real language.
What we're trying to do is to uncover the
mechanisms that the language processing system uses. And just
like we have to invent devices for telling us
for giving us measures that we can use to
record what's happening. We have to invent sentences or
stimuli that kind of crack the system they break.
So by the reason we, we like sentences with
ambiguities in them or sentences that are likely to
be misinterpreted is because in some ways by showing
where the system breaks, we can get an idea
of the mechanisms that are involved in normal language
processing. So we will, we know for example, that
uh people uh seem to treat the heads of
phrases as particularly important. Um And we know that
on the basis of these experiments that we've done
that manipulate whether there's a garden path or not
and the point isn't what happens in Garden Path
sentences. The point is how do people interpret heads
of phrases and heads of phrases of course occur,
you know, by definition, you know, every phrase has
a head, so heads of phrases are all over
the place. So that's just one example to make
the point that yes, exactly what you say is
true, which doesn't mean that it's pointless to study
these weird sentences or to look at how people
misinterpret each other. But that it tells us what
is the architecture that's enabling the language system to
be so robust.
Uh uh No, of course, the point I was
making was just that perhaps we don't have to
be too worried about misinterpreting language because someone might
misunderstand what you were saying there or what I
was saying just a few seconds ago and think
that, oh my God, we're misinterpreting language all the
time.
Of course, there are situations, you know, like in
a courtroom, for example, where you have to be
very careful not to get misinterpreted. But fortunately, normally
we're not, we're not being um questioned or grilled
about anything. So we don't have to worry about
that level of precision. You know, when you teach
also though, you know, you're very conscious of the
fact that you can get misinterpreted. You can say
something in a way that's unclear, use a word
that a student doesn't know that you haven't bothered
to define yet. So a lot of language processing
is about not only saying what you want to
say, but formulating a model of your interlocutor so
that you can uh produce utterances or write sentences
that are likely to be understood. So the burden
is not just on the comprehend or to understand,
but the burden is also on the speaker or
the writer or the signer to produce uh sentences
that are appropriate to the person they're communicating with.
So, still on the topic of uh fluency of
language production, does it have any relationship at all
with individual differences? Like for example, in terms of
intelligence and executive function?
Um Yeah, so that's something that I looked at
in some of my earlier work. And um and
I mentioned the work that we had done on
A DH D and it, there is some evidence
that the that's comprehend well. So for, let's take
an obvious example, like vocabulary. So a component of
language production is producing words and producing words that
fit the meaning that you're trying to convey as
accurately as possible. Um That's going to be related
to the size of your vocabulary. And we already
talked about lexical diversity in the context of, you
know, older adults who've had more time and experience
in which to acquire bigger vocabularies. Um We also
know that whatever you might think of the validity
of um standardized assessments like IQ tests and um
GREs and things like that. A big component of
those tests is vocabulary. And so uh the people
with bigger vocabularies tend to end up with higher
scores on things like IQ tests and um other
kinds of standardized assessments. And so that would suggest
that there's a relationship between IQ and uh language
production, but it's really um probably mediated by other
things that we don't really understand very well, like
uh how that vocabulary is acquired, what kinds of
experiences have gone into the opportunities that people have
had to acquire vocabulary. And then some of the
factors you've also mentioned like inhibition. Um So, uh
the relationship between inhibition and and other cognitive systems
is something that we're only beginning to understand. But
there are teams of researchers um like Al Kim
and Jared Novik, for example, who've been focusing heavily
on the role that inhibition might be playing in
individual differences in language processing. So, um I think
it's a really interesting question. I think it's really,
really hard to study because uh there's so many
dimensions on which people can differ from each other.
But in general, um there's, it's almost certainly going
to be the case that individual differences in cognitive
skills are going to correlate with language production and
comprehension skills as well.
By the way, on the topic of comprehension, in
what ways does redundant information contribute to it?
OK. So that's a really big question. Um Right.
So, redundancy in language has been a topic that
we've been, it's motivated linguistic and psycholinguistics theories for
decades and decades. And it goes back back to
the gray and maxims about, you know, to be
brief is, you know, one of the things you're
supposed to do and being brief means don't produce
any unnecessary words. Uh And there, there are views
currently of the efficiency of the language processing system
that kind of go along with that idea that,
you know, generally speaking uses up metabolic uh is,
you know, is metabolically demanding. So I want to
communicate my ideas as efficiently as I possibly can.
Redundancy would seem to be um inconsistent with that
goal. Um So, you know, Bryce would seem to
be on the right track when he says that
people should not be redundant. But as more and
more work is showing speakers are redundant and listeners
benefit from that redundancy. Uh So, for example, um
what uh Grace would say is that, for example,
I should not call this a green pen. I
should just call it a pen because there's no
other pen right now in the discourse. So to
include the color at modifier is pointless. It's, it's
information that you don't need. Um But what we
now know from a lot of research is that
for example, color as a trait is an extremely
salient property. And in fact, there's research showing that
I'm more likely to call this a green pen
in English. Um This is worked by Rubio Fernandez.
Um I'm more likely to call this a green
pen when I'm speaking in English than I would
if I were speaking in Spanish or they say
Portuguese because the adjective comes first. And if I'm
speaking in English, and I'm going to say the,
you know, by producing green, you know what I'm
referring to because in this context, I can't quite
see what's in my background. But the green things
are this pen, maybe that plant and the stuff
in the outside the window. So by producing a
redundant adjective and or at least an adjective that
isn't necessary in the context because it's the only
pencil, I actually will help you to identify the
referent more quickly. Um So, and we also know
that people say things like uh repeat again and
repeat again is redundant. Um And I have a
phd student working with me named um Casey Felton
and he's looking at uh people's production of things
like lift up. So in English, we say lift
up the table. Um BUT the meaning of lift
is to elevate. And so you don't need that
particle in theory, it's, it is truly redundant. Um
But this is so, so common in com in
regular language, we say add in subtract out, mix
together uh combine together it's, you know, just all
over the place.
So all of those expressions redundant expressions we also
have in Portuguese like for example, repeat again, we
say Ruperto Trevis something like that. So we're always
saying that as well,
which suggests that it's a general tendency on the
part of humans that they are redundant. So I
think then the question gets to be, well, what
is efficiency and efficiency isn't just producing the fewest
syllables per unit of meaning it could be efficient
to provide listeners with redundancy because it does give
them multiple opportunities to get your message. And we
had just been talking about the uh the opportunities
for misinterpretation that are in language and how perhaps
in real conversations we're not so bad at understanding
each other. Maybe it's because we're redundant and repeat
again in is technically redundant. And your teachers would
yell at you for saying that. But in real
life, if I'm teaching my class and I say,
OK, I want you to redo this again. Um
I tend not to say that but imagine if
I said I'm giving my students two chances to
get my meaning. I give them the re on
redo and I give them again as a separate
word. And now my meaning becomes clear. Um I
see this a lot in, I don't know if
you ever do like online um exercise videos and
things where the instructor will say, OK, so let's
repeat that again. And you know, because it's really
important that you understand that we're going to now
do the same exercise that we just did. And,
you know, you need to understand that that's what's
coming next. So repeat again, is very healthy or
helpful, healthy. Um There, there was this feature. Um
So in general, I think redundancy is valuable. Um
PARTLY because listeners attention wanders and they uh they
might not know what you meant at this point,
but they will know what you mean at a
later point in the sentence. So there's more and
more of an appreciation and a respect for redundancy
in language that it actually benefits the comprehend or
uh and allows the speaker to convey their message
more clearly. It also is just less, less abrupt.
So lift, lift that versus lift that up, you
know, the up is somehow gentler it g it
makes the instruction a little bit gentler and um
I don't quite know what's going on with that,
but I have that as an intuition.
Yeah. So I have two more topics I would
like to ask you about. Uh WE'VE already mentioned
eye tracking several times here today. So how do
you actually study reading and information processing through eye
tracking? And what can we learn from it
exactly? So we know that the eyeball is structured
so that there is a, so we know about
the retina on the back of the eye, you
know, the collection of cells that are responsible for
our ability to um process visual details, especially the
cones, right? The cones are the the cells that
are allowing us to, to read essentially or to
extract visual detail. And the this foveal area vision
is actually quite small. And what that means is
that we need to make eye movements in order
to process the information in the environment. And eye
trackers capitalize on that fact. So when we read
and imagine we're reading text like English or Portuguese
that's read left to right top to bottom. Um
We will, our eyes will land on to right
around the middle of a word. Typically, it's a
little bit left of center. Um BUT right about
the middle of a word and then we move
our eyes to the next word and then we
move our eyes to the next word and we,
and we're basically reading each and every word in
a text except for words like the and of
which we tend to skip over probably could because
we can see them in our peripheral vision and
they're also highly constrained contextually. So we, when we
look at a visual scene, it's the same thing.
So when you look at like what's behind me
in order, you can get a sense in in
one fixation that you're looking at some kind of
a home office. But you in order to identify
what are the actual objects in the scene, you
have to make fixations all around it. You know
that there's a clock over here and that there's
a picture on the floor for some weird reason
underneath the window, you know, et cetera. So, um
what this means then is that the position of
the eye is giving us information about what the
comprehend is attending to. So, if I want to
know what word you're paying, you're currently processing. When
you're reading some information on a computer screen, you,
the position of your eyeball is gonna tell me
that. So what I need is an eye movement
monitoring system that essentially records the position of the
pupil that tells me where you're looking. And that
eye movement recording system allows me to identify the
exact word that you're currently looking at and even
the character within the world that you're looking at.
Um In fact that you can even get more
precision than, than a single character on a computer
screen. So what we've learned from this kind of
eye tracking research is that, as I've mentioned, people
tend to fixate on each individual word except for
some highly predictable, highly frequent words and that the
fixation durations. So the length of an individual fixation
correlates with the difficulty of the word that's currently
being processed. So a word like cat would be,
would receive a shorter fixation than a word like
feline because feline is a longer word, but also
because it's a less common word. And we also
know that when people get garden path sentences, when
they get to the part of the sentence where
they realize they've messed up, they will exhibit long
fixations and they'll also do multiple fixations. So they
usually, you only look, you only fixate on a
word once or twice. But if this, the sentences
become confusing, you'll look at it multiple times and
you'll actually also make a backwards eye movement called
a regression as if you're sort of going. Oh
This is hopeless. Let me start again here and
you go backwards and skilled readers make a lot
of regressions. It's not a sign that of failure.
It's actually what efficient reading looks like. So we
use the eye movement monitoring system or eye tracking
to give us. Uh YOU know, I mentioned before
that language processing comprehension is, but we can actually
make it a little less private by monitoring the
position of your eyes. I can tell if I
put you on an eye tracker, what words you're
looking at, how long you're spending on that word.
Um How long the eye movement is over to
the next word, et cetera. And that gives us
a lot of valuable information about information processing uh
during language comprehension.
So I have one final question. Then this is
a topic that is I guess unrelated to the
others to some extent. But when it comes to
language learning, and I guess that many people out
there would be interested in language learning because they
are parents or educators or they, they are interested
in knowing if we can improve language learning, particularly
in Children, I guess. So can singing facilitate language
learning.
Oh, gosh, that's also, that's also a study I
probably should have suggested we not try to go
into in too much detail because I'm going to
tell you. So, what I'm gonna do is I'm
gonna hijack this part of our conversation to tell
you a little bit about how we often do
science. So that study is a complete one off.
It's a study that I did with, um, uh
Katie Overly and her phd student at the time
when I was at Edinburgh and I served on
the committee of the graduate student who was working
on that project. And what we showed in that
study is that, yeah, it looks like um, singing
can help people to learn, you know, a second
language. Um But that was a study that I
worked on um completely as just sort of like
I said this one off, I've never really pursued
it again. So I couldn't tell you what the
current literature on that topic looks like. I also
would emphasize that that study focused on learning second
language. I believe it was Hungarian. Um THAT, that
she was focusing on as, and she used that
just because it was unlikely that very many of
the subjects we would want to test already learn
New Hungarian and, or maybe it was Czech, see,
I can't even remember what the second language was
that we were looking at. And um, but that's
probably a different process from what we see in
first language learning in Children. Although we know that
teachers and you know, educators, parents like to use
songs as a way to teach kids words. Um
Maybe it makes them more memorable, memorable, makes them
uh the repet repetition helps them to learn. Um
Also it helps Children I think to learn phonological
patterns. So in, in song, you tend to get
rhymes and so rhymes are going to facilitate phonological
awareness and phonological awareness we know is really important
for learning how to read. Um In fact, you
might know, I don't know if you know about
the studies that were done a few decades ago
on um on Portuguese illite illiterates. Um So people
who after the revolution were um put into literacy
programs in Portugal. So adults who had never had
the opportunity to learn to read. And um so
like uh um oh his name is escaping me,
a Portuguese researcher who spent his, most of his
career in Belgium did a lot of these um
studies along with Jos Allegria and some other people
anyway, they show that people who are, who do
not read and write. Adults who did not know
how to read and write had very little phonological
awareness. They could tell you how many syllables were
in a word. They kind of intuitively understood things
like syllables, but they didn't understand the things like
phone names. And once they learned to read the
same adults could tell you that a word like
um stick has four sounds to it. Um Whereas
prior to literacy, they would say it had maybe
three sounds to it. Um You know, if that
anyway, so all of that is to say that
phonological awareness which could be something that is conveyed
through music, helps people to become literate or is
a consequence of becoming literate. It's probably both a
cause and a consequence and in that way is
sort of related to language learning. But here I'm
kind of speculating and I'm in some ways out
of my specific area of expertise. So,
no, that, that's fair enough. So, Doctor Freud, just
before we go, would you like just to tell
people where they can find you and your work
on the internet?
Um Yeah, so I, you can find me in
Davis, California most of the time. Um OR in
San Diego where my brother lives with his child.
My brother is also a psycho linguist. Um So
here at the University of California, San Diego, um
but on the internet, if you Google, my name,
um you usually, I will come up pretty, pretty
much the first or second item on your search.
There is a Fernando Ferreira in Brazil who's a
volleyball player. That's not me. Um But uh I,
and if you Google Fernando Ferreira Davis, then you,
then you will find me pretty easily. So, yeah,
I'm easy to find Fernando Ferreira as I tell
people is a very common name. Um BUT not
so much in cognitive science. So
yeah, probably in Portugal it would be much more
common,
I guess. And Brazil, it seems like it's quite
common in Brazil. So um yeah, yeah, when people
say your name, it's so unusual. It's like only
here.
Great. So I'm leaving some links to your work
in the description box of the interview and thank
you so much again for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been a real pleasure
to talk with you.
Thank you for the opportunity. I've really enjoyed this
conversation. So thanks.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Zuk Mar Nevs called Hofi Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel
Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz J and
Lain Jung Y and the Samuel K. Hes Mark
Smith, J. Tom Hummel s friends, David Sloan Wilson.
Yasa dear, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte
Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stass Nale Me,
Gary G Alman, Samos, Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian
Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca, Bela
Gil Cortez Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams
and Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa Anton
Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Chao, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier,
Bangalore Fist Dey Junior, Old Eon Starry Michael Bailey.
Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn. Jeff mcmahon, Jake
Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson,
Chris to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda
Brendan Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine
Steinman, Perlis Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan
Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Janner Urla. Good enough,
Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers
is our web, Jim Frank Luca stuffin, Tom Veg
and Bernard N Cortes Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman Negro, Nick Ortiz
and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you
for all.